Kathleen Steinhoefel
King's College London

Peek-a-boo with Protein Structure Candidates

Research on protein structure prediction and protein folding has a long
history, dating back to the seminal work by Pauling and Corey in 1953.
Research on these topics has been back in the spotlight with the Nobel prize
2013 awarded to Karplus, Levitt and Warshel for their work on computer-aided
analysis of protein molecules and for introducing simplified all-atom energy
functions for protein folding simulation. From a computational point of
view, all-atom protein structure prediction is a challenging task.
Interestingly, Finkelstein and Badretdinov approximated the worst case
folding time of a protein of length n as exp(n^{2/3})ns. In terms of
algorithmic complexity, this implies a quasi-exponential structure
prediction time. Consequently, protein structure prediction has been shown
to be NP-hard for various lattice models and contact-based energy functions.
A common approach to tackle NP-hard problems are local search-based
heuristics, such as simulated annealing. However, the performance of these
methods depends strongly on properties of the underlying energy landscape
induced by the objective function and the associated neighbourhood relation.
In 2008, we devised a simulated-annealing procedure with a time-dependent
cooling schedule and a neighbourhood relation determined by the pull-move
set. We obtained experimental evidence that the maximum depth D of local
minima of the underlying energy landscape can be upper bounded by D<n^{2/3}.
More recently, population-based local search methods have been investigated
to speed up computation time. In this talk, we present a Firefly-inspired
algorithmic approach for protein structure prediction that incorporates our
simulated annealing procedure. It resembles a peek-a-boo game, since from
time to time the best found protein conformation is revealed to a set of
candidate conformations (fireflies), which in turn search through the energy
landscape induced by this best solution until a better conformation has been
found.  In experiments over three-dimensional cubic and three-dimensional
face-centred-cubic (FCC) lattices we analysed the total number of objective
function evaluations required to achieve the optimum energy values as key
complexity parameter. For H-P instances and cubic lattices we obtain an
average speed-up over eight instances of 2.1, leaving out two extreme values
(otherwise, 8.8). For six M-J instances the average speed-up over four
instances is 1.2 (leaving out two extreme values, otherwise 1.1), which is
achieved for a population size of only eight.

